Xamarin Helps Enterprises Build An App For That
Comment Now Follow Comments 
The mobile app development market is growing and rapidly evolving. Over 80 percent of the companies Lopez Research interviewed are building a strategy for scaling application development. Most enterprises that I’ve interviewed have less than 20 mobile apps deployed today.

If mobile is so important, why are so few enterprises building apps? Frankly, it’s complicated. The devices and operating systems continue to change at a blistering pace. There are also numerous approaches to application development, including native, hybrid and HTML-5 development. Each of these development environments has its own set of tools and methodologies. To muddy the waters,  many of these solutions are built by startups when companies want to deal with established vendors. Most companies were looking for the silver bullet of mobile app deployment.Today most development teams understand that they will use a variety of choices.

Xamarin is a mobile development platform that can be used to build, test and monitor apps. It’s one several companies that offer platforms in the enterprise space. Others include companies such as Appcelerator, IBM IBM -0.77% and Kony for the enterprise market. The venture funded company was founded in 2011 and it’s gaining traction with over 1 million unique developer downloads and 15,000 customers. In the past 12 months, Xamarin’s developer community has grown 98 percent and sales have more than doubled. Xamarin’s differentiation stems from its ability to build native and hybrid apps for iOS, Android, Mac and Windows using a single C# code base.

This taps into one of the world’s largest developer communities. It enables IT to use existing resources to build mobile apps with limited staff training. Beyond development, Xamarin also offers mobile application lifecycle features with the launch of Xamarin Test Cloud and Xamarin Insights. To keep pace, platform vendors must constantly innovate. Today Xamarin announced:

A platform for wearables, such as Apple AAPL +0.31% Watch. Enterprises will need to build apps that work across a wide range of devices, including wearables. Over a third of the companies Lopez Research interviewed want to build apps for wearables. This adds even more operating systems into the mix, such as Android Wear. Today, Xamarin announced its platform will enable developers to design and develop Apple Watch apps from Microsoft MSFT +0.3%’s Visual Studio IDE.
Forms to help companies kickstart. It announced Xamarin.Forms. The idea is to allow developers to share more than 90 percent of code across platforms, with general availability for Windows 8 and a private beta of its support for Windows 10 universal apps. It has a native UI for the phone and tablet form factors for iOS, Android and Windows but uses shared code on the back end.
New solutions for Visual Studio Online. In a joint engineering between Microsoft and Xamarin, the companies added new workflows in Visual Studio Online. Now a Virtual Studio Online user can build Xamarin.Android apps through Visual Studio Online’s cloud build service, reducing the overhead of configuring and maintaining an on-site build server. Visual Studio Online can also initiate mobile tests in Xamarin Test Cloud and automatically creates work items back in Visual Studio Online based on test results. Visual Studio Online receives work items automatically using Xamarin Insights to monitor production apps for crashes, exceptions and events.
According to Xamarin research, 41 percent of respondents report that enterprise apps are released at least monthly or more frequently, with roughly the same release frequency for consumer apps. In my experience, many companies are updating apps once a quarter. As Xamarin noted, development velocity and rapid innovation are key. Businesses need a way to scale mobile.

While many of my clients are still building native experiences, I’ve seen companies reviewing the merits of cross-platform solutions, such as Xamarin. These platforms continue to improve and deliver richer mobile experiences than in the past. It’s important that companies match the development model to the experience that they are trying to create. In many cases, they’ll use more than one model. As companies look to scale their mobile efforts, I suggest reviewing how a cross-platform solution could fulfill a large portion of your development needs.