
 Forbes
New Posts +2
 
Most Popular
 
Lists
 
Video
 
10 Stocks to Buy Now
 
 
 


Connect


|Sign up |Log in Help|AdChoices|Terms|Privacy
Ben Kepes
Ben Kepes
Contributor
FOLLOW
I cover how technology helps business compete.
full bio →
Opinions expressed by Forbes Contributors are their own.
Comment Now
Follow Comments 
Xamarin Rolls Out Even More Cross-Platform Mobile App Development Goodness

Ben KepesBen Kepes
Contributor
Microsoft Announces More Of Its Mobile-First, Cloud-First Product Line

Ben KepesBen Kepes
Contributor
TECH 8/21/2014 @ 7:00dop. 5 484 views
Xamarin Raises $54 Million--Because M&A... And Mobile
Comment Now Follow Comments 
Xamarin is a fascinating vendor. Giving mobile developers the ability to quickly and easily create applications on iOS, Android, Mac and Windows devices in a fully native manner, but from a single code base, is kind of like the holy grail for developers. Xamarin boasts that its platform is used by over 20% of the Fortune 500 companies and deployed across some 120 countries. Companies like Dow Jones, Bosch, Haliburton and Rdio rely on Xamarin to help create their mobile applications.

Xamarin has also built a deep relationship with Microsoft. As that company realizes that mobile is indeed one of the most important ways of delivering applications it has been running to deliver a message that is compelling to mobile developers. And, since Microsoft MSFT +0.3% doesn’t have an awesome mobile story itself, what better way to do so than via partnering?

This combination of great enterprise uptake and a strong partnership leads to investor excitement and this is borne out today with the news that Xamarin has raised a $54 million Series C round. The round was led by experienced investors Lead Edge Capital, Insight Venture Partners, Charles River Ventures, Ignition Partners, and Floodgate and brings total funding for the company to date to the princely sum of $82 million.

And just look at the statistics, over a mere three years, Xamarin has built a community of over 700,000 developers. And those developers are delivering to a marketplace that IDC predicts will grow from just shy of $1 billion in 2012 to close to $5 billion by 2017. Bering the central hub on which those mobile applications are developed is a happy place to be.

But outside of this massive business opportunity for Xamarin (which is undisputable), this investment says more about Xamarin’s corporate development opportunities – the company, as well as its strong ties with Microsoft, has built relationships with vendors like Salesforce.com CRM -0.03%, Samsung and SAP, making it an interesting company to watch from an M&A perspective.

The chances of Xamarin staying independent seem very slim to me. Just who will taken them out, and for how much, remains to be seen. There are still a few things that Xamarin needs to deliver to make it an even more compelling platform – throw in some monitoring, a bit of analytics built on top of that and Xamarin’s price tag grows even higher.

Watch this space.

Connect with Ben on Twitter @benkepes | LinkedIn 

Comment Now Follow Comments
Print
Report Corrections
Reprints & Permissions

Follow Comments
Share
CONFERENCES AND MORE
FORBES
 BUSINESS  INVESTING  TECHNOLOGY  ENTREPRENEURS  OP/ED  LEADERSHIP  LIFESTYLE  LISTS
Conferences
2015 Forbes 400 Summit on Philanthropy
2015 Forbes Women’s Summit
2015 Forbes Asia: The Next Tycoons
2015 Forbes Reinventing America: The AgTech Summit
2015 Forbes Under 30 Summit
2015 Forbes Global CEO Conference
2015 Forbes CMO Summit
2015 Forbes Healthcare Summit
2016 Forbes CIO Summit
Education
Forbes School of Business at Ashford University
Newsletters
Forbes Investor
Special Situation Survey
Forbes Dividend Investor
Forbes Premium Income Report
Investing Newsletters
Products
Forbes eBooks
Forbes Newsfeeds
Reprints & Permissions
Forbes Magazine
Company Info
Advertise
Forbes Press Room
Forbes Careers
Contact Us
Sitemap
Help
Forbes Magazine  ForbesLife  ForbesAsia
2 Free Issues  Subscriber Services  Gift Subscription
Forbes China Forbes Czech Forbes India Forbes Israel Forbes Japan Forbes Kazakhstan Forbes Mexico Forbes Middle East Forbes Poland Forbes Romania Forbes Russia Forbes Spain Forbes Thailand Forbes Vietnam RealClear RealClear Politics RealClear Markets RealClear World RealClear Sports
2015 Forbes.com LLC™   All Rights ReservedTerms and Conditions Privacy Statement Market Data by Morningstar AdChoices
Cookie Preference
Next Post